--- 
permalink: mocha-0-2-released
updated_at: 2007-01-24 04:48:43 +00:00
guid: 295adadf-9daa-4a29-ae65-7bd0b6880d59
title: Mocha 0.2 released
id: '26'
filter:
- erb
- textile
categories:
- mocha_release
created_at: 2006-08-11 12:04:37 +00:00
keywords: mocha stubba test testing mock stub mocking stubbing ruby rails
---
I've just released a "new version":http://rubyforge.org/frs/?group_id=1917 of the Ruby mocking and stubbing library, "Mocha":http://gofreerange.com/mocha/docs/, that I first "mentioned":/blog/2006-07-16-mocking-and-stubbing-in-ruby a while ago. Here are the release notes:

* Small change to @SetupAndTeardown#teardown_stubs@ suggested by "Luke Redpath":http://www.lukeredpath.co.uk to allow use of Stubba with "RSpec":http://rspec.rubyforge.org.
* Reorganized directory structure and extracted addition of setup and teardown methods into SmartTestCase mini-library.
* Addition of auto-verify for Mocha (but not Stubba). This means there is more significance in the choice of expects or stubs in that any expects on a mock will automatically get verified.

So instead of...

bc(prettyprint). wotsit = Mocha.new
wotsit.expects(:thingummy).with(5).returns(10)
doobrey = Doobrey.new(wotsit)
doobrey.hoojamaflip
wotsit.verify

you need to do...

bc(prettyprint). wotsit = mock()
wotsit.expects(:thingummy).with(5).returns(10)
doobrey = Doobrey.new(wotsit)
doobrey.hoojamaflip
# no need to verify

There are also shortcuts as follows...

instead of...

bc(prettyprint). wotsit = Mocha.new
wotsit.expects(:thingummy).returns(10)
wotsit.expects(:summat).returns(25)

you can have...

bc(prettyprint). wotsit = mock(:thingummy => 5, :summat => 25)

and instead of...

bc(prettyprint). wotsit = Mocha.new
wotsit.stubs(:thingummy).returns(10)
wotsit.stubs(:summat).returns(25)

you can have...

bc(prettyprint). wotsit = stub(:thingummy => 5, :summat => 25)
