--- 
permalink: fed-up-with-rails-fixtures-part-one
updated_at: 2006-08-11 08:00:01 +00:00
guid: c08a6487-1400-454b-bc6e-a27fa1c65577
title: Fed up with Rails fixtures? (part one)
id: '23'
filter:
- erb
- textile
categories: []

created_at: 2006-08-10 04:09:00 +00:00
keywords: fixtures rails test ruby testing database activerecord
---
In a "previous post":/blog/2006-06-27-rails-fixtures-help-or-hindrance I explained why I'm not a big fan of Rails fixtures. But how can you avoid using them and still obtain good test coverage? Try forgetting about fixtures and writing unit tests that only test a single class and nothing else. Here's an example where you hardly[1] need to involve the database at all...

bc(prettyprint). class Initial < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def self.up
    create_table :companies do |t|
      t.column :name, :string
    end
    create_table :employees do |t|
      t.column :company_id, :integer
      t.column :salary, :integer
    end
  end
end

bc(prettyprint). class Company < ActiveRecord::Base
  has_many :employees
  def wage_bill
    employees.inject(0) { |total, employee| total + employee.salary }
  end
end

bc(prettyprint). class Employee < ActiveRecord::Base
  belongs_to :company
end

p. So instead of writing this...

bc(prettyprint).. # companies.yml
walmart:
  id: 1
  name: Walmart

# employees.yml
fred:
  id: 1
  company_id: 1
  salary: 10000
anne:
  id: 2
  company_id: 1
  salary: 20000

bc(prettyprint).. class CompanyTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
  fixtures :companies, :employees
  def test_should_calculate_wage_bill
    assert_equal 30000, companies(:walmart).wage_bill
  end
end

p. You can write this...

bc(prettyprint).. class CompanyTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
  def test_should_calculate_wage_bill
    employees = []
    employees << Employee.new(:salary => 10000)
    employees << Employee.new(:salary => 20000)
    company = Company.new(:employees => employees)
    assert_equal 10000 + 20000, company.wage_bill
  end
end

p. This way you home in on the behaviour of the @Company#wage_bill@ method and avoid testing the "ActiveRecord":http://api.rubyonrails.com/classes/ActiveRecord/Base.html code and access to the database. More ways to avoid hitting the database will follow in another post.


fn1. ActiveRecord still needs to know what columns in each table e.g.

bc(prettyprint). SHOW FIELDS FROM companies
