---
permalink: mocha-0-4-released
updated_at: 2007-01-24 04:47:45 +00:00
guid: 21fc9eed-97c8-4ddf-9869-4c07cce42d46
title: Mocha 0.4 released
id: '158'
categories:
- mocha_release
created_at: 2007-01-22 12:47:34 +00:00
keywords: mocha release mock stub testing rubyforge
---
So I finally got round to releasing a "new version":http://rubyforge.org/frs/?group_id=1917&release_id=9184 of "Mocha":https://mocha.jamesmead.org/. Much of the functionality has been available for some time if you've been using the Rails plugin based on subversion HEAD, but now you can get it in all in a gem (or other package). The most recent changes centre around allowing mocking of Object instance methods.

Release notes...

* Allow naming of mocks (patch from "Chris Roos":http://blog.seagul.co.uk).
* Specify multiple return values for consecutive calls.
* Improved consistency of expectation error messages.
* Allow mocking of Object instance methods e.g. kind_of?, type.
* Provide aliased versions of #expects and #stubs to allow mocking of these methods.
* Added at_least, at_most, at_most_once methods to expectation.
* Allow expects and stubs to take a hash of method and return values.
* Eliminate warning: "instance variable @yield not initialized" (patch from "Xavier Shay":http://blog.rhnh.net/).
* Restore instance methods on partial mocks (patch from "Chris Roos":http://blog.seagul.co.uk).
* Allow stubbing of a method with non-word chars in its name (patch from "Paul Battley":http://po-ru.com).
* Removed coupling to "Test::Unit":https://web.archive.org/web/20100208155315/http://ruby-doc.org/stdlib/libdoc/test/unit/rdoc/classes/Test/Unit.html.
* Allow specified exception instance to be raised (patch from "Chris Roos":http://blog.seagul.co.uk).
* Make mock object_id appear in hex like normal Ruby inspect (patch from "Paul Battley":http://po-ru.com).
* Fix path to object.rb in rdoc rake task (patch from "Tomas Pospisek":http://www.workingwithrails.com/person/5103-tomas-pospisek).
* Reverse order in which expectations are matched, so that last expectation is matched first. This allows e.g. a call to #stubs to be effectively overridden by a call to #expects (patch from "Tobias Lutke":http://blog.leetsoft.com/).
* Stubba & SmartTestCase modules incorporated into Mocha module so only need to require 'mocha' - no longer need to require 'stubba'.
* AutoMocha removed.

Thanks to all who contributed.

Enjoy :-)
