--- 
permalink: finding-the-cheapest-train-fare
updated_at: 2007-01-12 11:56:43 +00:00
guid: f54d68bb-ebef-4ac5-9392-2741638bc52a
title: Finding the Cheapest Train Fare
id: '155'
filter:
- erb
- textile
categories: []

created_at: 2007-01-12 11:53:56 +00:00
keywords: gner train ticket money saving
---
For my sins, I travel from Durham to London and back by train every week. As far as I know the cheapest way for me to do this is to buy GNER Advance tickets as soon as they are released (usually about 3 months ahead). The user interfaces for all of the train booking sites are painful, so I've been playing around with automating my ticket booking procedure.

I'll let you know how I get on.

In the meantime I noticed a "comment":/blog/2006-08-03-a-plethora-of-train-tickets#comment-99 on my article about "the plethora of train tickets":/blog/2006-08-03-a-plethora-of-train-tickets...

bq. It is unbelievable there are so many. Just wish there were as many people who would help you find the cheapest ticket for your journey!

So I thought people might be interested to read this excerpt I read in "an article":http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/cgi-bin/viewnews.cgi?newsid1154104247,31062,#tricks on Martin Lewis' excellent "MoneySavingExpert website":http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/

bq. _Is there an automated system that does this for you?_

bq. Not at the moment. Yet this article is so popular, I'm exploring creating a free automated Train Ticket Calculator with live info to calculate the cheapest tickets for you.  It's actually so complex it needs a research mathematician to build the algorithms to get it automated; but we're getting there.  If you're interested, keep up to date via the weekly email.

You've got to love the fact that it needs a _research mathematician_ to build the algorithms.

Now here's a crazy thought - why not simplify the system of tickets?

Maybe it's time "to write to my MP":http://www.writetothem.com/.
