--- 
permalink: mocha-release-0-9-1
updated_at: 2008-08-30 16:49:18 +00:00
guid: be9e6b4d-d778-45cb-a779-7ff68a457eb3
title: Mocha Release 0.9.1
id: '341'
filter:
- erb
- textile
categories:
- mocha_release
created_at: 2008-08-30 16:48:14 +00:00
keywords: mocha mock stub ruby testing tdd
---
h2. Release Notes

* Fixed bug #21465 - expects & stubs should support method names as strings (as well as symbols) or fail fast. Convert all expectation method names to a symbol in case they were supplied as a string.
* By removing Mock#unexpected_method_called we reduce the number of methods vulnerable to the problem that surfaced in bug #21563.
* Fix bug #21563 - stubbing 'verified?' method is unsafe. Instance method names on the Mock class should be more obscure.
* Performance improvement. StubbaExampleTest goes twice as fast on my local machine.
* Added primitive performance test to default rake task.
* Fix format of case statements which don't work in Ruby 1.9 and make others consistent.
* There is no point in running (potentially expensive) checks if configuration is set to allow such checks to fail. This is a relatively quick fix in response to Chris McGrath's performance problems.
* Fix for bug #21161 - 'uninitialized constant Deprecation in stubba.rb'.
* It's more readable to talk about 'once' and 'twice' rather than '1 time' and '2 times'.
* Fix bug #20883 - never should raise when called to prevent follow up errors. Fail fast when there are no matching invokable expectations and handle the stub_everything case sensibly. This might not be entirely backwards compatible, but I think the benefits outweigh the risks. The most likely change is that a test that was already failing will now fail faster, which doesn't seem so awful.
