--- 
permalink: mocha-release-0-9-5
updated_at: 2009-02-01 12:57:19 +00:00
guid: 80fb6569-0091-4906-ab35-769a5d1e46a7
title: Mocha Release 0.9.5
id: 361
filter: 
- erb
- textile
categories: 
- mocha_release
created_at: 2009-02-01 12:55:57 +00:00
keywords: mocha mock stub ruby testing tdd
---
h2. Ruby 1.9 Compatibility

Note that "Mocha":http://gofreerange.com/mocha/docs/ should be compatible with Ruby 1.9.1 using MiniTest or "Test::Unit":http://www.ruby-doc.org/stdlib/libdoc/test/unit/rdoc/index.html. However, if you want to use "Test::Unit":http://www.ruby-doc.org/stdlib/libdoc/test/unit/rdoc/index.html, you will need to install the "test-unit gem":http://test-unit.rubyforge.org/.

h2. Release Notes

* Fixed "Lighthouse bug #32":http://floehopper.lighthouseapp.com/projects/22289/tickets/32 - stub_everything should mean mock responds to anything.
* Added "Expectation#twice":http://mocha.rubyforge.org/classes/Mocha/Expectation.html#M000035 to improve readability. Thanks to pull request from "Celestino Gomes":http://tinogomes.wordpress.com/.
* In Ruby 1.9.1, requiring 'test/unit' loads a thin wrapper around MiniTest and "Test::Unit::TestCase":http://www.ruby-doc.org/stdlib/libdoc/test/unit/rdoc/classes/Test/Unit/TestCase.html ends up inheriting from MiniTest::Unit::TestCase. So we need to avoid including the "Mocha":http://gofreerange.com/mocha/docs/ modules more than once to avoid nasty consequences. Thanks to "Matthias Hennemeyer":http://matthiashennemeyer.com/ for help with this.
* Ruby 1.9 includes rake, but not rake/contrib. For the moment I've moved the sshpublisher require into the only rake task that needs it, so that I can at least run the tests in Ruby 1.9. It looks like I will need to "build a rake/contrib gem":http://intertwingly.net/blog/2008/01/07/Rake-Contrib-for-1-9 or similar to get this working properly.
