---
permalink: mocha-configuration
updated_at: 2009-02-09 11:57:26 +00:00
guid: f8a30b4f-5516-4fb1-ac63-dd68dc3ae619
title: Mocha Configuration
id: '364'
filter:
- erb
- textile
categories: []

created_at: 2009-02-09 11:40:50 +00:00
keywords: mocha mock stub ruby testing tdd configuration warning role interface coupling
---
h2. Introduction

In his "recent look":http://blog.brianguthrie.com/articles/2009/02/03/ioke-mocking-mocha-as-exemplar at Mocha's internals, Brian Guthrie mentioned that he hadn't realised it was possible to configure Mocha to warn or disallow mocking of non-existent methods. So I thought it was time I explained "Mocha's configuration settings":https://web.archive.org/web/20090329000048/http://mocha.rubyforge.org/classes/Mocha/Configuration.html. These configuration settings are all somewhat experimental and feedback on their effectiveness would be welcome.

There are 3 levels for all of the existing conditions :-

bc(prettyprint).. # default behaviour
Mocha::Configuration.allow(condition)

# warning is displayed when condition is met
Mocha::Configuration.warn_when(condition)

# error is raised when condition is met
Mocha::Configuration.prevent(condition)

h2. Stubbing a non-existent method

This is useful if you want to ensure that methods you're mocking really exist. A common criticism of unit tests with mock objects is that such a test may (incorrectly) pass when an equivalent non-mocking test would (correctly) fail. While you should always have some integration tests, particularly for critical business functionality, this Mocha configuration setting should catch scenarios when mocked methods and real methods have become misaligned.

bc(prettyprint).. Mocha::Configuration.prevent(:stubbing_non_existent_method)

class Example
end

class ExampleTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
  def test_example
    example = Example.new
    example.stubs(:method_that_doesnt_exist)
    # => Mocha::StubbingError: stubbing non-existent method:
    # =>   #<Example:0x593760>.method_that_doesnt_exist
  end
end

h2. Stubbing a method unnecessarily

This is useful for identifying unused stubs. Unused stubs are often accidentally introduced when code is "refactored":http://martinfowler.com/bliki/DefinitionOfRefactoring.html.

bc(prettyprint).. Mocha::Configuration.prevent(:stubbing_method_unnecessarily)

class ExampleTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
  def test_example
    example = mock('example')
    example.stubs(:unused_stub)
    # => Mocha::StubbingError: stubbing method unnecessarily:
    # =>   #<Mock:example>.unused_stub(any_parameters)
  end
end

h2. Stubbing a non-public method

Many people think that it's good practice only to mock public methods. This is one way to prevent your tests being too tightly coupled to the internal implementation of a class. Such tests tend to be very brittle and not much use when refactoring.

bc(prettyprint).. Mocha::Configuration.prevent(:stubbing_non_public_method)

class Example
  def internal_method; end
  private :internal_method
end

class ExampleTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
  def test_example
    example = Example.new
    example.stubs(:internal_method)
    # => Mocha::StubbingError: stubbing non-public method:
    # =>   #<Example:0x593530>.internal_method
  end
end

h2. Stubbing Method on Non-Mock Object

If you like the idea of "mocking roles not objects":http://www.jmock.org/oopsla2004.pdf and "you don't like stubbing concrete classes":http://www.mockobjects.com/2007/04/test-smell-mocking-concrete-classes.html, this is the setting for you. However, while this restriction makes a lot of sense in Java with its "explicit interfaces":http://java.sun.com/docs/books/tutorial/java/concepts/interface.html, it may be moot in Ruby where roles are probably best represented as Modules. Anyway that's probably a discussion for another day.

bc(prettyprint).. Mocha::Configuration.prevent(:stubbing_method_on_non_mock_object)

class Example
  def example_method; end
end

class ExampleTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
  def test_example
    example = Example.new
    example.stubs(:example_method)
    # => Mocha::StubbingError: stubbing method on non-mock object:
    # =>   #<Example:0x593620>.example_method
  end
end
