--- 
permalink: mocha-releases-0-13-0
created_at: 2012-11-11 18:20:00 +00:00
updated_at: 2012-11-11 18:20:00 +00:00
title: Mocha Release 0.13.0
description: Hopefully no more monkey-patching of test libraries.
categories:
- mocha_release
keywords: mocha mock object testing ruby
guid: 0c1c2150-7bd8-4c02-9b1c-89deb58bada6
---
h2. Release Notes

* Major overhaul of MiniTest & Test::Unit integration. Mocha now integrates with later versions of the two test libraries using documented hooks rather than monkey-patching. This should mean that Mocha will integrate with new versions of either library without the need to release a new version of Mocha each time, which was clearly bad and unsustainable. Many thanks to "@tenderlove":https://github.com/tenderlove, "@zenspider":https://github.com/zenspider & "@kou":https://github.com/kou for their help, suggestions & patience.
* Temporarily deprecated @require 'mocha'@. Use @require 'mocha/setup'@ instead. The plan is that eventually @require 'mocha'@ will *not* automatically integrate with either of the two test libraries as it does at the moment, and you'll need to explicitly & separately trigger the integration. I think this will provide a lot more flexibility and will hopefully do away with the need for the @require: false@ option in the @Gemfile@ which has always confused people.
* Deprecated @require 'mocha_standalone'@ and @require 'mocha/standalone'@. Use @require 'mocha/api@ instead.
* Although these are not part of Mocha's public API, I thought I should mention that the MiniTest and Test::Unit assertion counter classes have been combined into a single class @Mocha::Integration::AssertionCounter@.
* Extracted @Mocha::Hooks@ module from @Mocha::API@ and added documentation for test library authors.
* Improvements to documentation. Much of it has been combined into the @README@ file.
* Fix for "issue #101":https://github.com/freerange/mocha/issues/101 - @Mock#respond_to?@ doesn't work with a @String@ argument - thanks to "@urbanautomaton":https://github.com/urbanautomaton.
* Fix for "issue #105":https://github.com/freerange/mocha/issues/105 - Travis CI link in the  "README":http://gofreerange.com/mocha/docs/ - thanks to "@cknadler":https://github.com/cknadler.
* Various improvements to automated testing of integration with test libraries.
* Make deprecation warnings more prominent.
